Add phone calls anomaly detection tutorial (#21845)
dotnet/docs: docs/machine-learning/tutorials/phone-calls-anomaly-detection.md

---
title: 'Tutorial: Detect anomalies in phone calls'
description: Learn how to build an anomaly detection application for time series data. This tutorial creates a .NET Core console application using C# in Visual Studio 2019.
ms.date: 12/04/2020
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.custom: mvc, title-hack-0612
#Customer intent: As a developer, I want to use ML.NET in a time-series anomaly detection for number of phone calls so that I can analyze the data for anomaly points to take the appropriate action.
---
# Tutorial: Detect anomalies in time series with ML.NET

Learn how to build an anomaly detection application for time series data. This tutorial creates a .NET Core console application using C# in Visual Studio 2019.

In this tutorial, you learn how to:
> [!div class="checklist"]
>
> * Load the data
> * Detect period for a time series
> * Detect anomaly for a periodical time series

> You can find the source code for this tutorial at the [dotnet/samples](https://github.com/dotnet/samples/tree/master/machine-learning/tutorials/ProductSalesAnomalyDetection) repository.

Reviewer: Wrong link?

Reviewer 2: Once the PR in the samples repo is merged, then this link will work.

## Prerequisites

> * [Visual Studio 2019 version 16.7.8 or later](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/?utm_medium=microsoft&utm_source=docs.microsoft.com&utm_campaign=inline+link&utm_content=download+vs2019) with the ".NET Core cross-platform development" workload installed.

Reviewer: I think new articles are preferred to be compatible with .NET 5.0

Author: Is there anything needs to change?

Reviewer 2: @guinao can you just add a bullet point pointing out that they need to .NET 5 SDK. I believe it comes preinstalled with the latest version of VS, but just to make it clear that this is a .NET 5 sample.

Reviewer 2: No change, can you just make sure the version of VS2019 already comes with .NET 5 installed.

The following table is a data preview from your \*.csv file:

| timestamp  | value |
|--------|--------------|
| 2018/9/3  | 36.69670857  |
| 2018/9/4  | 35.74160571  |
| .....  | .....  |
| 2018/10/3  | 34.49893429  |
| ...    | ....   |

### Create classes and define paths

Next, define your input and prediction class data structures.

Add a new class to your project:

1. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click the project, and then select **Add > New Item**.

2. In the **Add New Item dialog box**, select **Class** and change the **Name** field to *PhoneCallsData.cs*. Then, select the **Add** button.

   The *PhoneCallsData.cs* file opens in the code editor.

3. Add the following `using` statement to the top of *PhoneCallsData.cs*:

   ```csharp
   using Microsoft.ML.Data;
   ```

4. Remove the existing class definition and add the following code, which has two classes `PhoneCallsData` and `PhoneCallsPrediction`, to the *PhoneCallsData.cs* file:

    [!code-csharp[DeclareTypes](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/PhoneCallsData.cs#DeclareTypes "Declare data record types")]

>     `PhoneCallsData` specifies an input data class. The [LoadColumn](xref:Microsoft.ML.Data.LoadColumnAttribute.%23ctor%28System.Int32%29) attribute specifies which columns (by column index) in the dataset should be loaded.

Reviewer 2: For this section, would it be possible to expand a little bit more about what the the input columns represent. The timestamp is kind of self explanatory but there's not a lot of information on the value column

>     `PhoneCallsPrediction` specifies the prediction data class. For SR-CNN detector, the prediction is variable accroding to the [detect mode](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.ml.timeseries.srcnndetectmode?view=ml-dotnet) specified. In this sample we select the AnomalyAndMargin mode. It outputs seven columns. In most cases, `IsAnomaly`, `ExpectedValue`, `UpperBoundary` and `LowerBoundary` are informative enough. They tell you if a point is anomaly, the expected value of the point and the lower / upper boundary region of the point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    `PhoneCallsPrediction` specifies the prediction data class. For SR-CNN detector, the prediction depends on the [detect mode](xref:Microsoft.ML.TimeSeries.SrCnnDetectMode) specified. In this sample we select the `AnomalyAndMargin` mode. The output contains seven columns. In most cases, `IsAnomaly`, `ExpectedValue`, `UpperBoundary` and `LowerBoundary` are informative enough. They tell you if a point is an anomaly, the expected value of the point and the lower / upper boundary region of the point.
```

> 5. Add the following code to the line right above the `Main` method to specify those paths:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Add the following code to the line right above the `Main` method to specify the path to your data file:
```

    [!code-csharp[Declare global variables](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#DeclareGlobalVariables "Declare global variables")]

### Initialize variables in Main

1. Replace the `Console.WriteLine("Hello World!")` line in the `Main` method with the following code to declare and initialize the `mlContext` variable:

    [!code-csharp[CreateMLContext](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#CreateMLContext "Create the ML Context")]

    The [MLContext class](xref:Microsoft.ML.MLContext) is a starting point for all ML.NET operations, and initializing `mlContext` creates a new ML.NET environment that can be shared across the model creation workflow objects. It's similar, conceptually, to `DBContext` in Entity Framework.

### Load the data

Data in ML.NET is represented as an [IDataView class](xref:Microsoft.ML.IDataView). `IDataView` is a flexible, efficient way of describing tabular data (numeric and text). Data can be loaded from a text file or from other sources (for example, SQL database or log files) to an `IDataView` object.

> 1. Add the following code as the next line of the `Main()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Add the following code as the next line of the `Main` method:
```

    [!code-csharp[LoadData](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#LoadData "loading dataset")]

    The [LoadFromTextFile()](xref:Microsoft.ML.TextLoaderSaverCatalog.LoadFromTextFile%60%601%28Microsoft.ML.DataOperationsCatalog,System.String,System.Char,System.Boolean,System.Boolean,System.Boolean,System.Boolean%29) defines the data schema and reads in the file. It takes in the data path variables and returns an `IDataView`.

## Time series anomaly detection

> Time series anomaly detection is the process of detecting time-series data outliers; points on a given input time-series where the behavior isn't what was expected, or "weird". These anomalies can be typical indicative of some events of interest in the problem domain: a cyber-attack on user accounts, power outage, bursting RPS on a server, memory leak, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Time series anomaly detection is the process of detecting time-series data outliers; points on a given input time-series where the behavior isn't what was expected, or "weird". These anomalies are typically indicative of some events of interest in the problem domain: a cyber-attack on user accounts, power outage, bursting RPS on a server, memory leak, etc.
```

> To find anomaly on time series, one should first determine the period of the series. Then, the time series can be decomposed into several components as `Y = T + S + R`, where `Y` is the original series, `T` is the trend component, `S` is the seasonal componnent and `R` is the residual component of the series. This step is called [decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decomposition_of_time_series). Finally, detection is performed on the residual component to find the anomalies. In ML.NET, The SR-CNN algorithm is an advanced and novel algorithm that is based on Spectral Residual (SR) and Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) to detect anomaly on time-series( Refer to [this](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.03821.pdf) paper for more details on this algorithm).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To find anomaly on time series, you should first determine the period of the series. Then, the time series can be decomposed into several components as `Y = T + S + R`, where `Y` is the original series, `T` is the trend component, `S` is the seasonal componnent and `R` is the residual component of the series. This step is called [decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decomposition_of_time_series). Finally, detection is performed on the residual component to find the anomalies. In ML.NET, The SR-CNN algorithm is an advanced and novel algorithm that is based on Spectral Residual (SR) and Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) to detect anomaly on time-series( Refer to the [Time-Series Anomaly Detection Service at Microsoft](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.03821.pdf) paper for more details on this algorithm).
```

> In this tutorial, you will see that these procedures can be completed in ML.net with simply two function invokes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will see that these procedures can be completed using two functions.
```

## Detect Period

In the first step, we invoke the `DetectSeasonality` function to determine the period of the series.

> ### Create the DetectPeriod() method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Create the DetectPeriod method
```

> The `DetectPeriod()` method:

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is needed

```suggestion
```

> 1. Create the `DetectPeriod()` method, just after the `Main()` method, using the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create the `DetectPeriod` method, just below the `Main` method, using the following code:
```

    ```csharp
    static void DetectPeriod(MLContext mlContext, IDataView phoneCalls)
    {

    }
    ```

> 2. Use the [DetectSeasonality](xref:Microsoft.ML.TimeSeriesCatalog.DetectSeasonality) function to detect period. Add it to the `DetectPeriod()` method with the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Use the [DetectSeasonality](xref:Microsoft.ML.TimeSeriesCatalog.DetectSeasonality) function to detect period. Add it to the `DetectPeriod` method with the following code:
```

    [!code-csharp[DetectSeasonality](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#DetectSeasonality)]

> 3. Display the period value by adding the following as the next line of code in the `DetectPeriod()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Display the period value by adding the following as the next line of code in the `DetectPeriod` method:
```

    [!code-csharp[DisplayPeriod](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#DisplayPeriod)]

> 4. Add the following call to the `DetectPeriod()`method in the `Main()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Add the following call to the `DetectPeriod` method in the `Main` method:
```

    [!code-csharp[CallDetectPeriod](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#CallDetectPeriod)]

### Period detection results

> Your results should be similar to the following.

Reviewer 2: Is the user supposed to run the application at this point? If so, I would specify it here.

```suggestion
Run the application. Your results should be similar to the following.
```

```console
Period of the series is: 7.
```

## Detect Anomaly

> In this step, we use the [`SrCnnEntireDetector`](xref:Microsoft.ML.Transforms.TimeSeries.SrCnnEntireAnomalyDetector) to find anomalies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this step, you use the [`SrCnnEntireDetector`](xref:Microsoft.ML.Transforms.TimeSeries.SrCnnEntireAnomalyDetector) to find anomalies.
```

> ### Create the DetectAnomaly() method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Create the DetectAnomaly method
```

> 1. Create the `DetectAnomaly()` method, just after the `Main()` method, using the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create the `DetectAnomaly` method, just below the `DetectPeriod` method, using the following code:
```

    ```csharp
    static void DetectAnomaly(MLContext mlContext, IDataView phoneCalls, int period)
    {

    }
    ```

> 2. Setup [SrCnnEntireAnomalyDetectorOptions](xref:Microsoft.ML.Transforms.TimeSeries.SrCnnEntireAnomalyDetectorOptions) in the `DetectAnomaly()` method with the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Setup [SrCnnEntireAnomalyDetectorOptions](xref:Microsoft.ML.Transforms.TimeSeries.SrCnnEntireAnomalyDetectorOptions) in the `DetectAnomaly` method with the following code:
```

    [!code-csharp[SetupSrCnnParameters](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#SetupSrCnnParameters)]

> 3. Detect anomaly by SR-CNN algorithm by adding the following line of code in the `DetectAnomaly()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Detect anomaly by SR-CNN algorithm by adding the following line of code in the `DetectAnomaly` method:
```

    [!code-csharp[DetectAnomaly](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#DetectAnomaly)]

> 4. Convert the output data view into a strongly typed `IEnumerable` for easier display using the `CreateEnumerable()`method with the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Convert the output data view into a strongly typed `IEnumerable` for easier display using the [`CreateEnumerable`](xref:Microsoft.ML.DataOperationsCatalog.CreateEnumerable%2A) method with the following code:
```

    [!code-csharp[CreateEnumerableForResult](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#CreateEnumerableForResult)]

> 5. Create a display header with the following code as the next line in the `DetectAnomaly()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Create a display header with the following code as the next line in the `DetectAnomaly` method:
```

    [!code-csharp[DisplayHeader](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#DisplayHeader)]

    You'll display the following information in your change point detection results:

    * `Index` is the index of each point.
    * `Anomaly` is the indicator of wheather each point is detected as anomaly.
    * `ExpectedValue` is the estimated value of each point.
    * `LowerBoundary` is the lowest value each point can be to be not anomaly.
    * `UpperBoundary` is the highest value each point can be to be not anomaly.

6. Iterate through the `predictions` `IEnumerable` and display the results with the following code:

    [!code-csharp[DisplayAnomalyDetectionResults](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#DisplayAnomalyDetectionResults)]

> 7. Add the following call to the `DetectAnomaly()`method in the `Main()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Add the following call to the `DetectAnomaly` method in the `Main` method:
```

    [!code-csharp[CallDetectAnomaly](./snippets/phone-calls-anomaly-detection/csharp/Program.cs#CallDetectAnomaly)]

## Anomaly detection results

> Your results should be similar to the following. During processing, messages are displayed. You may see warnings, or processing messages. Some messages have been removed from the following results for clarity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the application. Your results should be similar to the following. During processing, messages are displayed. You may see warnings, or processing messages. Some messages have been removed from the following results for clarity.
```
